<div>  
    <h1>SPARQL-Generate - query and generate both RDF and text</h1>

    <p><strong>Generate RDF or text from web documents in XML, JSON, CSV, GeoJSON, HTML, CBOR, plain text with regular expressions.<br/>
    Generate RDF or text streams from large CSV documents, MQTT or WebSocket streams, repeated HTTP Get operations.<br/>
    Directly generate <a href="http://www.rdfhdt.org">HDT</a> as the output of big transformations.<br/>
    Use it as a <a href="https://ns.inria.fr/sparql-template/">STTL</a> implementation.<br/>
    Extend it to support new data sources and formats.</strong> </p>
    <p>SPARQL-Generate is an extension of SPARQL 1.1 for querying not only RDF datasets but also documents in arbitrary formats. <br/>
    It offers a simple and expressive template-based option to generate RDF Graphs or text, from documents and different streams. It presents the following advantages:</p>

    <ul>
    <li>Anyone familiar with SPARQL can easily learn SPARQL-Generate;</li>
    <li>Learning SPARQL-Generate helps you learning SPARQL;</li>
    <li>SPARQL-Generate leverages the expressivity of SPARQL 1.1: Aggregates, Solution Sequences and Modifiers, SPARQL functions and their extension mechanism.</li>  
    <li>It integrates seamlessly with existing standards for consuming Semantic Web data, such as SPARQL or Semantic Web programming frameworks.</li>
    </ul>

    <a id="try-it-online" href="playground.html">Try it online</a>   <a id="new" href="sublime.html">New: Integration with the Sublime Text editor</a>

    <hr/>

  <div class="section">
    <h2><a name="Publications"></a>Publications</h2>

    <blockquote>
    <p>Maxime Lefran&#xe7;ois, Antoine Zimmermann, Noorani Bakerally <i>A SPARQL extension for generating RDF from heterogeneous formats</i>, In Proc. Extended Semantic Web Conference, ESWC, May 2017, Portoroz, Slovenia (long paper - <a class="externalLink" href="http://www.maxime-lefrancois.info/docs/LefrancoisZimmermannBakerally-ESWC2017-Generate.pdf">PDF</a> - <a href="LefrancoisZimmermannBakerally-ESWC2017-SPARQL.bib">BibTeX</a>)</p>
    <p>Maxime Lefran&#xe7;ois, Antoine Zimmermann, Noorani Bakerally <i>Flexible RDF generation from RDF and heterogeneous data sources with SPARQL-Generate</i>, In Proc. the 20th International Conference on Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management, EKAW, Nov 2016, Bologna, Italy (demo track - <a class="externalLink" href="http://www.maxime-lefrancois.info/docs/LefrancoisZimmermannBakerally-EKAW2016-Flexible.pdf">PDF</a> - <a href="LefrancoisZimmermannBakerally-EKAW2016-Flexible.bib">BibTeX</a>)</p>
    <p>Maxime Lefran&#xe7;ois, Antoine Zimmermann, Noorani Bakerally <i>G&#xe9;n&#xe9;ration de RDF &#xe0; partir de sources de donn&#xe9;es aux formats h&#xe9;t&#xe9;rog&#xe8;nes</i>, Actes de la 17&#xe8;me conf&#xe9;rence Extraction et Gestion des Connaissances, EGC, Jan 2017, Grenoble, France - (<a class="externalLink" href="http://www.maxime-lefrancois.info/docs/LefrancoisZimmermannBakerally-EGC2017-Generation.pdf">PDF</a> - <a href="LefrancoisZimmermannBakerally-EGC2017-Generation.bib">BibTeX</a>)</p>
    </blockquote>
  </div>

  <div class="section">
    <h2><a name="Implementation"></a>Implementation</h2>
    <div>
        <a class="github-button" href="https://github.com/sparql-generate/sparql-generate/subscription" data-icon="octicon-eye" data-size="large" data-show-count="true" aria-label="Watch sparql-generate/sparql-generate on GitHub">Watch</a>
        <a class="github-button" href="https://github.com/sparql-generate/sparql-generate" data-icon="octicon-star" data-size="large" data-show-count="true" aria-label="Star sparql-generate/sparql-generate on GitHub">Star</a>
    </div>

    <p><b>Use SPARQL-Generate as:</b></p>

    <ul>  
        <li><a href="playground.html">an web application</a>;</li>
        <li><a href="language-cli.html">an executable JAR</a>;</li>
        <li><a href="get-started.html">a Java library</a> with its <a href="apidocs/index.html">reference Java documentation</a>;</li>
        <!--<li><a href="standalone-app.html">a standalone Application</a>;</li>-->
        <!--<li><a href="language-api.html">a Web API</a>.</li>-->
    </ul>

    <p>See our predefined <a href="http://w3id.org/sparql-generate/fn/">SPARQL binding functions</a> and SPARQL-Generate <a href="http://w3id.org/sparql-generate/iter/">iterator functions</a>. You can also leverage the SPARQL 1.1 extension mechanism and implement your own functions to support any other format.</p>

    <p><b>Test, evaluate, contribute</b></p>
    <p>Our <a href="https://github.com/sparql-generate/sparql-generate/tree/master/sparql-generate-jena/src/test/resources">tests</a> contains tests from related work and more. You can request a new unit test, a new binding function or iterator function on <a href="https://github.com/sparql-generate/sparql-generate/issues">GitHub</a>. We also led <a href="evaluation.html">a comparative evaluation with the RML reference implementation</a>.</p>

  </div>
  
  <hr/>

  <div class="section" style="position: relative; z-index: -1">
    <h2><a name="Acknowledgments"></a>Acknowledgments</h2>
    <p>Thank you to the authors of <a href="http://www.rdfhdt.org">HDT</a>, and <a href="https://ns.inria.fr/sparql-template/">STTL</a></p>
    <p>This work has been partly funded by the ITEA2 12004 SEAS (Smart Energy Aware Systems) project, the ANR 14-CE24-0029 OpenSensingCity project, and bilateral research contracts with ENGIE R&amp;D.</p>
  </div>
</div>